<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter III</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02.xhtml" title="Chapter II"/><link rel="next" href="ch04.xhtml" title="Chapter IV"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter III" epub:type="chapter" id="id70360710757580"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter III</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Dwarf</em></h3></div></div></div><p>The worst of sleeping out of doors is that you wake up so dreadfully
early.  And when you wake you have to get up because the ground is so
hard that you are uncomfortable.  And it makes matters worse if there
is nothing but apples for breakfast and you have had nothing but apples
for supper the night before.  When Lucy had said—truly enough—that it
was a glorious morning, there did not seem to be anything else nice to
be said.  Edmund said what everyone was feeling, "We've simply got to
get off this island."</p><p>When they had drunk from the well and splashed their faces they all
went down the stream again to the shore and stared at the channel which
divided them from the mainland.</p><p>"We'll have to swim," said Edmund.</p><p>"It would be all right for Su," said Peter (Susan had won prizes for
swimming at school).  "But I don't know about the rest of us."  By "the
rest of us" he really meant Edmund, who couldn't yet do two lengths at
the school baths, and Lucy, who could hardly swim at all.</p><p>"Anyway," said Susan, "there may be currents.  Father says it's never
wise to bathe in a place you don't know."</p><p>"But, Peter," said Lucy, "look here.  I know I can't swim for nuts at
home—in England, I mean.  But couldn't we all swim long ago—if it was
long ago—when we were kings and queens in Narnia?  We could ride then
too, and do all sorts of things.  Don't you think―"</p><p>"Ah, but we were sort of grown–up then," said Peter.  "We reigned for
years and years and learned to do things.  Aren't we just back at our
proper ages again now?"</p><p>"Oh!" said Edmund in a voice which made everyone stop talking and
listen to him.</p><p>"I've just seen it all," he said.</p><p>"Seen what?" asked Peter.</p><p>"Why, the whole thing," said Edmund.  "You know what we were puzzling
about last night, that it was only a year ago since we left Narnia but
everything looks as if no one had lived in Cair Paravel for hundreds of
years?  Well, don't you see?  You know that, however long we seemed to
have lived in Narnia, when we got back through the wardrobe it seemed
to have taken no time at all?"</p><p>"Go on," said Susan.  "I think I'm beginning to understand."</p><p>"And that means," continued Edmund, "that, once you're out of Narnia,
you have no idea how Narnian time is going.  Why shouldn't hundreds of
years have gone past in Narnia while only one year has passed for us in
England?"</p><p>"By Jove, Ed," said Peter.  "I believe you've got it.  In that sense it
really was hundreds of years ago that we lived in Cair Paravel.  And
now we're coming back to Narnia just as if we were Crusaders or
Anglo–Saxons or Ancient Britons or someone coming back to modern
England!"</p><p>"How excited they'll be to see us―" began Lucy, but at the same
moment everyone else said "Hush!" or "Look!"  For now something was
happening.</p><p>There was a wooded point on the mainland a little to their right, and
they all felt sure that just beyond that point must be the mouth of the
river.  And now, round that point there came into sight a boat.  When
it had cleared the point, it turned and began coming along the channel
towards them.  There were two people on board, one rowing, the other
sitting in the stern and holding a bundle that twitched and moved as if
it were alive.  Both these people seemed to be soldiers.  They had
steel caps on their heads and light shirts of chain–mail.  Their faces
were bearded and hard.  The children drew back from the beach into the
wood and watched without moving a finger.</p><p>"This'll do," said the soldier in the stern when the boat had come
about opposite to them.</p><p>"What about tying a stone to his feet, Corporal?" said the other,
resting on his oars.</p><p>"Garn!" growled the other.  "We don't need that, and we haven't brought
one.  He'll drown sure enough without a stone, as long as we've tied
the cords right."  With these words he rose and lifted his bundle.
Peter now saw that it was really alive and was in fact a Dwarf, bound
hand and foot but struggling as hard as he could.  Next moment he heard
a twang just beside his ear, and all at once the soldier threw up his
arms, dropping the Dwarf in the bottom of the boat, and fell over into
the water.  He floundered away to the far bank and Peter knew that
Susan's arrow had struck on his helmet.  He turned and saw that she was
very pale but was already fitting a second arrow to the string.  But it
was never used.  As soon as he saw his companion fall, the other
soldier, with a loud cry, jumped out of the boat on the far side, and
he also floundered through the water (which was apparently just in his
depth) and disappeared into the woods of the mainland.</p><p>"Quick!  Before she drifts!" shouted Peter.  He and Susan, fully
dressed as they were, plunged in, and before the water was up to their
shoulders their hands were on the side of the boat.  In a few seconds
they had hauled her to the bank and lifted the Dwarf out, and Edmund
was busily engaged in cutting his bonds with the pocket knife.
(Peter's sword would have been sharper, but a sword is very
inconvenient for this sort of work because you can't hold it anywhere
lower than the hilt.) When at last the dwarf was free, he sat up,
rubbed his arms and legs, and exclaimed:</p><p>"Well, whatever they say, you don't <span class="emphasis"><em>feel</em></span> like ghosts."</p><p>Like most Dwarfs he was very stocky and deep–chested.  He would have
been about three feet high if he had been standing up, and an immense
beard and whiskers of coarse red hair left little of his face to be
seen except beak–like nose and twinkling black eyes.</p><p>"Anyway," he continued, "ghosts or not, you've saved my life and I'm
extremely obliged to you."</p><p>"But why should we be ghosts?" asked Lucy.</p><p>"I've been told all my life," said the Dwarf, "that these woods along
the shore were as full of ghosts as they were of trees.  That's what
the story is.  And that's why, when they want to get rid of anyone,
they usually bring him down here (like they were doing with me) and say
they'll leave him to the ghosts.  But I always wondered if they didn't
really drown 'em or cut their throats.  I never quite believed in the
ghosts.  But those two cowards you've just shot believed all right.
They were more frightened of taking me to my death than I was of going!"</p><p>"Oh," said Susan.  "So that's why they both ran away."</p><p>"Eh?  What's that?" said the Dwarf.</p><p>"They got away," said Edmund.  "To the mainland."</p><p>"I wasn't shooting to kill, you know," said Susan.  She would not have
liked anyone to think she could miss at such a short range.</p><p>"Hm," said the Dwarf.  "That's not so good.  That may mean trouble
later on.  Unless they hold their tongues for their own sake."</p><p>"What were they going to drown you for?" asked Peter.</p><p>"Oh, I'm a dangerous criminal, I am," said the Dwarf cheerfully.  "But
that's a long story.  Meantime, I was wondering if perhaps you were
going to ask me to breakfast?  You've no idea what an appetite it gives
one, being executed."</p><p>"There's only apples," said Lucy dolefully.</p><p>"Better than nothing, but not so good as fresh fish," said the Dwarf.
"It looks as if I'll have to ask you to breakfast instead.  I saw some
fishing tackle in that boat.  And anyway, we must take her round to the
other side of the island.  We don't want anyone from the mainland
coming down and seeing her."</p><p>"I ought to have thought of that myself," said Peter.</p><p>The four children and the Dwarf went down to the water's edge, pushed
off the boat with some difficulty, and scrambled aboard.  The Dwarf at
once took charge.  The oars were of course too big for him to use, so
Peter rowed and the Dwarf steered them north along the channel and
presently eastward round the tip of the island.  From here the children
could see right up the river, and all the bays and headlands of the
coast beyond it.  They thought they could recognise bits of it, but the
woods, which had grown up since their time, made everything look very
different.</p><p>When they had come round into open sea on the east of the island, the
Dwarf took to fishing.  They had an excellent catch of pavenders, a
beautiful rainbow–coloured fish which they all remembered eating in
Cair Paravel in the old days.  When they had caught enough they ran the
boat up into a little creek and moored her to a tree.  The Dwarf, who
was a most capable person (and, indeed, though one meets bad Dwarfs, I
never heard of a Dwarf who was a fool), cut the fish open, cleaned
them, and said:</p><p>"Now, what we want next is some firewood."</p><p>"We've got some up at the castle," said Edmund.</p><p>The Dwarf gave a low whistle.  "Beards and bedsteads!" he said.  "So
there really is a castle, after all?"</p><p>"It's only a ruin," said Lucy.</p><p>The Dwarf stared round at all four of them with a very curious
expression on his face.  "And who on earth―" he began, but then
broke off and said, "No matter.  Breakfast first.  But one thing before
we go on.  Can you lay your hand on your hearts and tell me I'm really
alive?  Are you sure I wasn't drowned and we're not all ghosts
together?"</p><p>When they had all reassured him, the next question was how to carry the
fish.  They had nothing to string them on and no basket.  They had to
use Edmund's hat in the end because no one else had a hat.  He would
have made much more fuss about this if he had not by now been so
ravenously hungry.</p><p>At first the Dwarf did not seem very comfortable in the castle.  He
kept looking round and sniffing and saying, "H'm.  Looks a bit spooky
after all.  Smells like ghosts, too."  But he cheered up when it came
to lighting the fire and showing them how to roast the fresh pavenders
in the embers.  Eating hot fish with no forks, and one pocket knife
between five people, is a messy business and there were several burnt
fingers before the meal was ended; but, as it was now nine o'clock and
they had been up since five, nobody minded the burns so much as you
might have expected.  When everyone had finished off with a drink from
the well and an apple or so, the Dwarf produced a pipe about the size
of his own arm, filled it, lit it, blew a great cloud of fragrant smoke
and said, "Now."</p><p>"You tell us your story first," said Peter.  "And then we'll tell you
ours."</p><p>"Well," said the Dwarf, "as you've saved my life it is only fair you
should have your own way.  But I hardly know where to begin.  First of
all I'm a messenger of King Caspian's."</p><p>"Who's he?" asked four voices all at once.</p><p>"Caspian the Tenth, King of Narnia, and long may he reign!" answered
the Dwarf.  "That is to say, he ought to be King of Narnia and we hope
he will be.  At present he is only King of us Old Narnians―"</p><p>"What do you mean by <span class="emphasis"><em>old</em></span> Narnians, please?" asked Lucy.</p><p>"Why, that's us," said the Dwarf.  "We're a kind of rebellion, I
suppose."</p><p>"I see," said Peter.  "And Caspian is the chief Old Narnian."</p><p>"Well, in a manner of speaking," said the Dwarf, scratching his head.
"But he's really a New Narnian himself, a Telmarine, if you follow me."</p><p>"I don't," said Edmund.</p><p>"It's worse than the Wars of the Roses," said Lucy.</p><p>"Oh dear," said the Dwarf.  "I'm doing this very badly.  Look here: I
think I'll have to go right back to the beginning and tell you how
Caspian grew up in his uncle's court and how he comes to be on our side
at all.  But it'll be a long story."</p><p>"All the better," said Lucy.  "We love stories."</p><p>So the Dwarf settled down and told his tale.  I shall not give it to
you in his words, putting in all the children's questions and
interruptions, because it would take too long and be confusing, and,
even so, it would leave out some points that the children only heard
later.  But the gist of the story, as they knew it in the end, was as
follows.</p></section><footer/></body></html>