<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter IV</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03.xhtml" title="Chapter III"/><link rel="next" href="ch05.xhtml" title="Chapter V"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter IV" epub:type="chapter" id="id70360710769840"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter IV</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Dwarf Tells of Prince Caspian</em></h3></div></div></div><p>Prince Caspian lived in a great castle in the centre of Narnia with his
uncle, Miraz, the King of Narnia, and his aunt, who had red hair and
was called Queen Prunaprismia.  His father and mother were dead and the
person whom Caspian loved best was his nurse, and though (being a
prince) he had wonderful toys which would do almost anything but talk,
he liked best the last hour of the day when the toys had all been put
back in their cupboards and Nurse would tell him stories.</p><p>He did not care much for his uncle and aunt, but about twice a week his
uncle would send for him and they would walk up and down together for
half an hour on the terrace at the south side of the castle.  One day,
while they were doing this, the King said to him,</p><p>"Well, boy, we must soon teach you to ride and use a sword.  You know
that your aunt and I have no children, so it looks as if you might have
to be King when I'm gone.  How shall you like that, eh?"</p><p>"I don't know, Uncle," said Caspian.</p><p>"Don't know, eh?" said Miraz.  "Why, I should like to know what more
anyone could wish for!"</p><p>"All the same, I <span class="emphasis"><em>do</em></span> wish," said Caspian.</p><p>"What do you wish?" asked the King.</p><p>"I wish—I wish—I wish I could have lived in the Old Days," said
Caspian.  (He was only a very little boy at the time.)</p><p>Up till now King Miraz had been talking in the tiresome way that some
grown–ups have, which makes it quite clear that they are not really
interested in what they are saying, but now he suddenly gave Caspian a
very sharp look.</p><p>"Eh?  What's that?" he said.  "What old days do you mean?"</p><p>"Oh, don't you know, Uncle?" said Caspian.  "When everything was quite
different.  When all the animals could talk, and there were nice people
who lived in the streams and the trees.  Naiads and Dryads they were
called.  And there were Dwarfs.  And there were lovely little Fauns in
all the woods.  They had feet like goats.  And―"</p><p>"That's all nonsense, for babies," said the King sternly.  "Only fit
for babies, do you hear?  You're getting too old for that sort of
stuff.  At your age you ought to be thinking of battles and adventures,
not fairy tales."</p><p>"Oh, but there <span class="emphasis"><em>were</em></span> battles and adventures in those days," said
Caspian.  "Wonderful adventures.  Once there was a White Witch and she
made herself Queen of the whole country.  And she made it so that it
was always winter.  And then two boys and two girls came from somewhere
and so they killed the Witch and they were made Kings and Queens of
Narnia, and their names were Peter and Susan and Edmund and Lucy.  And
so they reigned for ever so long and everyone had a lovely time, and it
was all because of Aslan―"</p><p>"Who's he?" said Miraz.  And if Caspian had been a very little older,
the tone of his uncle's voice would have warned him that it would be
wiser to shut up.  But he babbled on,</p><p>"Oh, don't you know?" he said.  "Aslan is the great Lion who comes from
over the sea."</p><p>"Who has been telling you all this nonsense?" said the King in a voice
of thunder.  Caspian was frightened and said nothing.</p><p>"Your Royal Highness," said King Miraz, letting go of Caspian's hand,
which he had been holding till now, "I insist upon being answered.
Look me in the face.  Who has been telling you this pack of lies?"</p><p>"N—Nurse," faltered Caspian, and burst into tears.</p><p>"Stop that noise," said his uncle, taking Caspian by the shoulders and
giving him a shake.  "Stop it.  And never let me catch you talking—or
<span class="emphasis"><em>thinking</em></span> either—about all those silly stories again.  There never
were those Kings and Queens.  How could there be two Kings at the same
time?  And there's no such person as Aslan.  And there are no such
things as lions.  And there never was a time when animals could talk.
Do you hear?"</p><p>"Yes, Uncle," sobbed Caspian.</p><p>"Then let's have no more of it," said the King.  Then he called to one
of the gentlemen–in–waiting who were standing at the far end of the
terrace and said in a cold voice, "Conduct His Royal Highness to his
apartments and send His Royal Highness's nurse to me AT ONCE."</p><p>Next day Caspian found what a terrible thing he had done, for Nurse had
been sent away without even being allowed to say good–bye to him, and
he was told he was to have a Tutor.</p><p>Caspian missed his nurse very much and shed many tears; and because he
was so miserable, he thought about the old stories of Narnia far more
than before.  He dreamed of Dwarfs and Dryads every night and tried
very hard to make the dogs and cats in the castle talk to him.  But the
dogs only wagged their tails and the cats only purred.</p><p>Caspian felt sure that he would hate the new Tutor, but when the new
Tutor arrived about a week later he turned out to be the sort of person
it is almost impossible not to like.  He was the smallest, and also the
fattest, man Caspian had ever seen.  He had a long, silvery, pointed
beard which came down to his waist, and his face, which was brown and
covered with wrinkles, looked very wise, very ugly, and very kind.  His
voice was grave and his eyes were merry so that, until you got to know
him really well, it was hard to know when he was joking and when he was
serious.  His name was Doctor Cornelius.</p><p>Of all his lessons with Doctor Cornelius the one that Caspian liked
best was History.  Up till now, except for Nurse's stories, he had
known nothing about the History of Narnia, and he was very surprised to
learn that the royal family were newcomers in the country.</p><p>"It was your Highness's ancestor, Caspian the First," said Doctor
Cornelius, "who first conquered Narnia and made it his kingdom.  It was
he who brought all your nation into the country.  You are not native
Narnians at all.  You are all Telmarines—that is, you all came from
the Land of Telmar, far beyond the Western Mountains.  That is why
Caspian the First is called Caspian the Conqueror."</p><p>"Please, Doctor," asked Caspian one day, "who lived in Narnia before we
all came here out of Telmar?"</p><p>"No men—or very few—lived in Narnia before the Telmarines took it,"
said Doctor Cornelius.</p><p>"Then who did my great–great–grandcesters conquer?"</p><p>"<span class="emphasis"><em>Whom</em></span>, not <span class="emphasis"><em>who</em></span>, your Highness," said Doctor Cornelius.  "Perhaps it
is time to turn from History to Grammar."</p><p>"Oh please, not yet," said Caspian.  "I mean, wasn't there a battle?
Why is he called Caspian the Conqueror if there was nobody here to
fight with him?"</p><p>"I said there were very few <span class="emphasis"><em>men</em></span> in Narnia," said the Doctor, looking
at the little boy very strangely through his great spectacles.</p><p>For a moment Caspian was puzzled and then suddenly his heart gave a
leap.  "Do you mean," he gasped, "that there were other things?  Do you
mean it was like in the stories?  Were there―?"</p><p>"Hush!" said Doctor Cornelius, laying his head very close to Caspian's.
"Not a word more.  Don't you know your nurse was sent away for telling
you about Old Narnia?  The King doesn't like it.  If he found me
telling you secrets, you'd be whipped and I should have my head cut
off."</p><p>"But why?" asked Caspian.</p><p>"It is high time we turned to Grammar now," said Doctor Cornelius, in a
loud voice.  "Will your Royal Highness be pleased to open Pulverulentus
Siccus at the fourth page of his <span class="emphasis"><em>Grammatical Garden or the Arbour of
Accidence pleasantlie open'd to Tender Wits</em></span>?"</p><p>After that it was all nouns and verbs till lunchtime, but I don't think
Caspian learned much.  He was too excited.  He felt sure that Doctor
Cornelius would not have said so much unless he meant to tell him more
sooner or later.</p><p>In this he was not disappointed.  A few days later his Tutor said,
"To–night I am going to give you a lesson in Astronomy.  At dead of
night two noble planets, Tarva and Alambil, will pass within one degree
of each other.  Such a conjunction has not occurred for two hundred
years, and your Highness will not live to see it again.  It will be
best if you go to bed a little earlier than usual.  When the time of
the conjunction draws near I will come and wake you."</p><p>This didn't seem to have anything to do with Old Narnia, which was what
Caspian really wanted to hear about, but getting up in the middle of
the night is always interesting and he was moderately pleased.  When he
went to bed that night, he thought at first that he would not be able
to sleep; but he soon dropped off and it seemed only a few minutes
before he felt someone gently shaking him.</p><p>He sat up in bed and saw that the room was full of moonlight.  Doctor
Cornelius, muffled in a hooded robe and holding a small lamp in his
hand, stood by the bedside.  Caspian remembered at once what they were
going to do.  He got up and put on some clothes.  Although it was a
summer night he felt colder than he had expected and was quite glad
when the Doctor wrapped him in a robe like his own and gave him a pair
of warm, soft buskins for his feet.  A moment later, both muffled so
that they could hardly be seen in the dark corridors, and both shod so
that they made almost no noise, master and pupil left the room.</p><p>Caspian followed the Doctor through many passages and up several
staircases, and at last, through a little door in a turret, they came
out upon the leads.  On one side were the battlements, on the other a
steep roof; below them, all shadowy and shimmery, the castle gardens;
above them, stars and moon.  Presently they came to another door, which
led into the great central tower of the whole castle: Doctor Cornelius
unlocked it and they began to climb the dark winding stair of the
tower.  Caspian was becoming excited; he had never been allowed up this
stair before.</p><p>It was long and steep, but when they came out on the roof of the tower
and Caspian had got his breath, he felt that it had been well worth it.
Away on his right he could see, rather indistinctly, the Western
Mountains.  On his left was the gleam of the Great River, and
everything was so quiet that he could hear the sound of the waterfall
at Beaversdam, a mile away.  There was no difficulty in picking out the
two stars they had come to see.  They hung rather low in the southern
sky, almost as bright as two little moons and very close together.</p><p>"Are they going to have a collision?" he asked in an awe–struck voice.</p><p>"Nay, dear Prince," said the Doctor (and he too spoke in a whisper).
"The great lords of the upper sky know the steps of their dance too
well for that.  Look well upon them.  Their meeting is fortunate and
means some great good for the sad realm of Narnia.  Tarva, the Lord of
Victory, salutes Alambil, the Lady of Peace.  They are just coming to
their nearest."</p><p>"It's a pity that tree gets in the way," said Caspian.  "We'd really
see better from the West Tower, though it is not so high."</p><p>Doctor Cornelius said nothing for about two minutes, but stood still
with his eyes fixed on Tarva and Alambil.  Then he drew a deep breath
and turned to Caspian.</p><p>"There," he said.  "You have seen what no man now alive has seen, nor
will see again.  And you are right.  We should have seen it even better
from the smaller tower.  I brought you here for another reason."</p><p>Caspian looked up at him, but the Doctor's hood concealed most of his
face.</p><p>"The virtue of this tower," said Doctor Cornelius, "is that we have six
empty rooms beneath us, and a long stair, and the door at the bottom of
the stair is locked.  We cannot be overheard."</p><p>"Are you going to tell me what you wouldn't tell me the other day?"
said Caspian.</p><p>"I am," said the Doctor.  "But remember.  You and I must never talk
about these things except here—on the very top of the Great Tower."</p><p>"No.  That's a promise," said Caspian.  "But do go on please."</p><p>"Listen," said the Doctor.  "All you have heard about Old Narnia is
true.  It is not the land of Men.  It is the country of Aslan, the
country of the Waking Trees and Visible Naiads, of Fauns and Satyrs, of
Dwarfs and Giants, of the gods and the Centaurs, of Talking Beasts.  It
was against these that the first Caspian fought.  It is you Telmarines
who silenced the beasts and the trees and the fountains, and who killed
and drove away the Dwarfs and Fauns, and are now trying to cover up
even the memory of them.  The King does not allow them to be spoken of."</p><p>"Oh, I do wish we hadn't," said Caspian.  "And I <span class="emphasis"><em>am</em></span> glad it was all
true, even if it is all over."</p><p>"Many of your race wish that in secret," said Doctor Cornelius.</p><p>"But, Doctor," said Caspian, "why do you say <span class="emphasis"><em>my</em></span> race?  After all, I
suppose you're a Telmarine too."</p><p>"Am I?" said the Doctor.</p><p>"Well, you're a Man anyway," said Caspian.</p><p>"Am I?" repeated the Doctor in a deeper voice, at the same moment
throwing back his hood so that Caspian could see his face clearly in
the moonlight.</p><p>All at once Caspian realised the truth and felt that he ought to have
realised it long before.  Doctor Cornelius was so small, and so fat,
and had such a very long beard.  Two thoughts came into his head at the
same moment.  One was a thought of terror—"He's not a real man, not a
man at all, he's a <span class="emphasis"><em>Dwarf</em></span>, and he's brought me up here to kill me."
The other was sheer delight—"There are real Dwarfs still, and I've
seen one at last."</p><p>"So you've guessed it in the end," said Doctor Cornelius.  "Or guessed
it nearly right.  I'm not a pure Dwarf.  I have human blood in me too.
Many Dwarfs escaped in the great battles and lived on, shaving their
beards and wearing high–heeled shoes and pretending to be men.  They
have mixed with your Telmarines.  I am one of those, only a half–Dwarf,
and if any of my kindred, the true Dwarfs, are still alive anywhere in
the world, doubtless they would despise me and call me a traitor.  But
never in all these years have we forgotten our own people and all the
other happy creatures of Narnia, and the long–lost days of freedom."</p><p>"I'm—I'm sorry, Doctor," said Caspian.  "It wasn't my fault, you know."</p><p>"I am not saying these things in blame of you, dear Prince," answered
the Doctor.  "You may well ask why I say them at all.  But I have two
reasons.  Firstly, because my old heart has carried these secret
memories so long that it aches with them and would burst if I did not
whisper them to you.  But secondly, for this: that when you become King
you may help us, for I know that you also, Telmarine though you are,
love the Old Things."</p><p>"I do, I do," said Caspian.  "But how can I help?"</p><p>"You can be kind to the poor remnants of the Dwarf people, like myself.
You can gather learned magicians and try to find a way of awaking the
trees once more.  You can search through all the nooks and wild places
of the land to see if any Fauns or Talking Beasts or Dwarfs are perhaps
still alive in hiding."</p><p>"Do you think there are any?" asked Caspian eagerly.</p><p>"I don't know—I don't know," said the Doctor with a deep sigh.
"Sometimes I am afraid there can't be.  I have been looking for traces
of them all my life.  Sometimes I have thought I heard a Dwarf–drum in
the mountains.  Sometimes at night, in the woods, I thought I had
caught a glimpse of Fauns and Satyrs dancing a long way off; but when I
came to the place, there was never anything there.  I have often
despaired; but something always happens to start me hoping again.  I
don't know.  But at least you can try to be a King like the High King
Peter of old, and not like your uncle."</p><p>"Then it's true about the Kings and Queens too, and about the White
Witch?" said Caspian.</p><p>"Certainly it is true," said Cornelius.  "Their reign was the Golden
Age in Narnia and the land has never forgotten them."</p><p>"Did they live in this castle, Doctor?"</p><p>"Nay, my dear," said the old man.  "This castle is a thing of
yesterday.  Your great–great–grandfather built it.  But when the two
sons of Adam and the two daughters of Eve were made Kings and Queens of
Narnia by Aslan himself, they lived in the castle of Cair Paravel.  No
man alive has seen that blessed place and perhaps even the ruins of it
have now vanished.  But we believe it was far from here, down at the
mouth of the Great River, on the very shore of the sea."</p><p>"Ugh!" said Caspian with a shudder.  "Do you mean in the Black Woods?
Where all the—the—you know, the ghosts live?"</p><p>"Your Highness speaks as you have been taught," said the Doctor.  "But
it is all lies.  There are no ghosts there.  That is a story invented
by the Telmarines.  Your Kings are in deadly fear of the sea because
they can never quite forget that in all stories Aslan comes from over
the sea.  They don't want to go near it and they don't want anyone else
to go near it.  So they have let great woods grow up to cut their
people off from the coast.  But because they have quarrelled with the
trees they are afraid of the woods.  And because they are afraid of the
woods they imagine that they are full of ghosts.  And the Kings and
great men, hating both the sea and the wood, partly believe these
stories, and partly encourage them.  They feel safer if no one in
Narnia dares to go down to the coast and look out to sea—towards
Aslan's land and the morning and the eastern end of the world."</p><p>There was a deep silence between them for a few minutes.  Then Doctor
Cornelius said, "Come.  We have been here long enough.  It is time to
go down and to bed."</p><p>"Must we?" said Caspian.  "I'd like to go on talking about these things
for hours and hours and hours."</p><p>"Someone might begin looking for us, if we did that," said Doctor
Cornelius.</p></section><footer/></body></html>