<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter VII</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch06.xhtml" title="Chapter VI"/><link rel="next" href="ch08.xhtml" title="Chapter VIII"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter VII" epub:type="chapter" id="id70360710869480"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter VII</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Old Narnia in Danger</em></h3></div></div></div><p>The place where they had met the Fauns was, of course, Dancing Lawn
itself, and here Caspian and his friends remained till the night of the
Great Council.  To sleep under the stars, to drink nothing but well
water and to live chiefly on nuts and wild fruit, was a strange
experience for Caspian after his bed with silken sheets in a tapestried
chamber at the castle, with meals laid out on gold and silver dishes in
the ante–room, and attendants ready at his call.  But he had never
enjoyed himself more.  Never had sleep been more refreshing nor food
tasted more savoury, and he began already to harden and his face wore a
kinglier look.</p><p>When the great night came, and his various strange subjects came
stealing into the lawn by ones and twos and threes or by sixes and
sevens—the moon then shining almost at her full—his heart swelled as
he saw their numbers and heard their greetings.  All whom he had met
were there: Bulgy Bears and Red Dwarfs and Black Dwarfs, Moles and
Badgers, Hares and Hedgehogs, and others whom he had not yet seen—five
Satyrs as red as foxes, the whole contingent of Talking Mice, armed to
the teeth and following a shrill trumpet, some Owls, the Old Raven of
Ravenscaur.  Last of all (and this took Caspian's breath away), with
the Centaurs came a small but genuine Giant, Wimbleweather of Deadman's
Hill, carrying on his back a basketful of rather sea–sick Dwarfs who
had accepted his offer of a lift and were now wishing they had walked
instead.</p><p>The Bulgy Bears were very anxious to have the feast first and leave the
council till afterwards: perhaps till to–morrow.  Reepicheep and his
Mice said that councils and feasts could both wait, and proposed
storming Miraz in his own castle that very night.  Pattertwig and the
other Squirrels said they could talk and eat at the same time, so why
not have the council and feast all at once?  The Moles proposed
throwing up entrenchments round the Lawn before they did anything else.
The Fauns thought it would be better to begin with a solemn dance.  The
Old Raven, while agreeing with the Bears that it would take too long to
have a full council before supper, begged to be allowed to give a brief
address to the whole company.  But Caspian and the Centaurs and the
Dwarfs over–ruled all these suggestions and insisted on holding a real
council of war at once.</p><p>When all the other creatures had been persuaded to sit down quietly in
a great circle, and when (with more difficulty) they had got Pattertwig
to stop running to and fro and saying "Silence!  Silence, everyone, for
the King's speech," Caspian, feeling a little nervous, got up.
"Narnians!" he began, but he never got any further, for at that very
moment Camillo the Hare said, "Hush!  There's a Man somewhere near."</p><p>They were all creatures of the wild, accustomed to being hunted, and
they all became still as statues.  The beasts all turned their noses in
the direction which Camillo had indicated.</p><p>"Smells like Man and yet not quite like Man," whispered Trufflehunter.</p><p>"It's getting steadily nearer," said Camillo.</p><p>"Two badgers and you three Dwarfs, with your bow at the ready, go
softly off to meet it," said Caspian.</p><p>"We'll settle 'un," said a Black Dwarf grimly, fitting a shaft to his
bowstring.</p><p>"Don't shoot if it is alone," said Caspian.  "Catch it."</p><p>"Why?" asked the Dwarf.</p><p>"Do as you're told," said Glenstorm the Centaur.</p><p>Everyone waited in silence while the three Dwarfs and two Badgers
trotted stealthily across to the trees on the north–west side of the
Lawn.  Then came a sharp dwarfish cry, "Stop!  Who goes there?" and a
sudden spring.  A moment later a voice, which Caspian knew well, could
be heard saying, "All right, all right, I'm unarmed.  Take my wrists if
you like, worthy Badgers, but don't bite right through them.  I want to
speak to the King."</p><p>"Doctor Cornelius!" cried Caspian with joy, and rushed forward to greet
his old master.  Everyone else crowded round.</p><p>"Pah!" said Nikabrik.  "A renegade Dwarf.  A half–and–halfer!  Shall I
pass my sword through its throat?"</p><p>"Be quiet, Nikabrik," said Trumpkin.  "The creature can't help its
ancestry."</p><p>"This is my greatest friend and the saviour of my life," said Caspian.
"And anyone who doesn't like his company may leave my army: at once.
Dearest Doctor, I <span class="emphasis"><em>am</em></span> glad to see you again.  How ever did you find us
out?"</p><p>"By a little use of simple magic, your Majesty," said the Doctor, who
was still puffing and blowing from having walked so fast.  "But there's
no time to go into that now.  We must all fly from this place at once.
You are already betrayed and Miraz is on the move.  Before mid–day
to–morrow you will be surrounded."</p><p>"Betrayed!" said Caspian.  "And by whom?"</p><p>"Another renegade Dwarf, no doubt," said Nikabrik.</p><p>"By your horse Destrier," said Doctor Cornelius.  "The poor brute knew
no better.  When you were knocked off, of course, he went dawdling back
to his stable in the castle.  Then the secret of your flight was known.
I made myself scarce, having no wish to be questioned about it in
Miraz's torture chamber.  I had a pretty good guess from my crystal as
to where I should find you.  But all day—that was the day before
yesterday—I saw Miraz's tracking parties out in the woods.  Yesterday
I learned that his army is out.  I don't think some of
your—um—pure–blooded Dwarfs have as much woodcraft as might be
expected.  You've left tracks all over the place.  Great carelessness.
At any rate something has warned Miraz that Old Narnia is not so dead
as he had hoped, and he is on the move."</p><p>"Hurrah!" said a very shrill and small voice from somewhere at the
Doctor's feet.  "Let them come!  All I ask is that the King will put me
and my people in the front."</p><p>"What on earth?" said Doctor Cornelius.  "Has your Majesty got
grasshoppers—or mosquitoes—in your army?"  Then after stooping down
and peering carefully through his spectacles, he broke into a laugh.</p><p>"By the Lion," he swore, "it's a mouse.  Signior Mouse, I desire your
better acquaintance.  I am honoured by meeting so valiant a beast."</p><p>"My friendship you shall have, learned Man," piped Reepicheep.  "And
any Dwarf—or Giant—in the army who does not give you good language
shall have my sword to reckon with."</p><p>"Is there time for this foolery?" asked Nikabrik.  "What are our plans?
Battle or flight?"</p><p>"Battle if need be," said Trumpkin.  "But we are hardly ready for it
yet, and this is no very defensible place."</p><p>"I don't like the idea of running away," said Caspian.</p><p>"Hear him!  Hear him!" said the Bulgy Bears.  "Whatever we do, don't
let's have any <span class="emphasis"><em>running</em></span>.  Especially not before supper; and not too
soon after it neither."</p><p>"Those who run first do not always run last," said the Centaur.  "And
why should we let the enemy choose our position instead of choosing it
ourselves?  Let us find a strong place."</p><p>"That's wise, your Majesty, that's wise," said Trufflehunter.</p><p>"But where are we to go?" asked several voices.</p><p>"Your Majesty," said Doctor Cornelius, "and all you variety of
creatures, I think we must fly east and down the river to the great
woods.  The Telmarines hate that region.  They have always been afraid
of the sea and of something that may come over the sea.  That is why
they have let the great woods grow up.  If traditions speak true, the
ancient Cair Paravel was at the river–mouth.  All that part is friendly
to us and hateful to our enemies.  We must go to Aslan's How."</p><p>"Aslan's How?" said several voices.  "We do not know what it is."</p><p>"It lies within the skirts of the Great Woods and it is a huge mound
which Narnians raised in very ancient times over a very magical place,
where there stood—and perhaps still stands—a very magical Stone.  The
Mound is all hollowed out within into galleries and caves, and the
Stone is in the central cave of all.  There is room in the mound for
all our stores, and those of us who have most need of cover and are
most accustomed to underground life can be lodged in the caves.  The
rest of us can lie in the wood.  At a pinch all of us (except this
worthy Giant) could retreat into the Mound itself, and there we should
be beyond the reach of every danger except famine."</p><p>"It is a good thing we have a learned man among us," said
Trufflehunter; but Trumpkin muttered under his breath, "Soup and
celery!  I wish our leaders would think less about these old wives'
tales and more about victuals and arms."  But all approved of
Cornelius's proposal and that very night, half an hour later, they were
on the march.  Before sunrise they arrived at Aslan's How.</p><p>It was certainly an awesome place, a round green hill on top of another
hill, long since grown over with trees, and one little, low doorway
leading into it.  The tunnels inside were a perfect maze till you got
to know them, and they were lined and roofed with smooth stones, and on
the stones, peering in the twilight, Caspian saw strange characters and
snaky patterns, and pictures in which the form of a Lion was repeated
again and again.  It all seemed to belong to an even older Narnia than
the Narnia of which his nurse had told him.</p><p>It was after they had taken up their quarters in and around the How
that fortune began to turn against them.  King Miraz's scouts soon
found their new lair, and he and his army arrived on the edge of the
woods.  And as so often happens, the enemy turned out stronger than
they had reckoned.  Caspian's heart sank as he saw company after
company arriving.  And though Miraz's men may have been afraid of going
into the wood, they were even more afraid of Miraz, and with him in
command they carried battle deeply into it and sometimes almost to the
How itself.  Caspian and other captains of course made many sorties
into the open country.  Thus there was fighting on most days and
sometimes by night as well; but Caspian's party had on the whole the
worst of it.</p><p>At last there came a night when everything had gone as badly as
possible, and the rain which had been falling heavily all day had
ceased at nightfall only to give place to raw cold.  That morning
Caspian had arranged what was his biggest battle yet, and all had hung
their hopes on it.  He, with most of the Dwarfs, was to have fallen on
the King's right wing at daybreak, and then, when they were heavily
engaged, Giant Wimbleweather, with the Centaurs and some of the
fiercest beasts, was to have broken out from another place and
endeavoured to cut the King's right off from the rest of the army.  But
it had all failed.  No one had warned Caspian (because no one in these
later days of Narnia remembered) that Giants are not at all clever.
Poor Wimbleweather, though as brave as a lion, was a true Giant in that
respect.  He had broken out at the wrong time and from the wrong place,
and both his party and Caspian's had suffered badly and done the enemy
little harm.  The best of the Bears had been hurt, a Centaur terribly
wounded, and there were few in Caspian's party who had not lost blood.
It was a gloomy company that huddled under the dripping trees to eat
their scanty supper.</p><p>The gloomiest of all was Giant Wimbleweather.  He knew it was all his
fault.  He sat in silence shedding big tears which collected on the end
of his nose and then fell off with a huge splash on the whole bivouac
of the Mice, who had just been beginning to get warm and drowsy.  They
all jumped up, shaking the water out of their ears and wringing their
little blankets, and asked the Giant in shrill but forcible voices
whether he thought they weren't wet enough without this sort of thing.
And then other people woke up and told the Mice they had been enrolled
as scouts and not as a concert party, and asked why they couldn't keep
quiet.  And Wimbleweather tiptoed away to find some place where he
could be miserable in peace and stepped on somebody's tail and somebody
(they said afterwards it was a fox) bit him.  And so everyone was out
of temper.</p><p>But in the secret and magical chamber at the heart of the How, King
Caspian, with Cornelius and the Badger and Nikabrik and Trumpkin, were
at council.  Thick pillars of ancient workmanship supported the roof.
In the centre was the Stone itself—a stone table, split right down the
centre, and covered with what had once been writing of some kind: but
ages of wind and rain and snow had almost worn them away in old times
when the Stone Table had stood on the hilltop, and the Mound had not
yet been built above it.  They were not using the Table nor sitting
round it: it was too magic a thing for any common use.  They sat on
logs a little way from it, and between them was a rough wooden table,
on which stood a rude clay lamp lighting up their pale faces and
throwing big shadows on the walls.</p><p>"If your Majesty is ever to use the Horn," said Trufflehunter, "I think
the time has now come."  Caspian had of course told them of this
treasure several days ago.</p><p>"We are certainly in great need," answered Caspian.  "But it is hard to
be sure we are at our greatest.  Supposing there came an even worse
need and we had already used it?"</p><p>"By that argument," said Nikabrik, "your Majesty will never use it
until it is too late."</p><p>"I agree with that," said Doctor Cornelius.</p><p>"And what do you think, Trumpkin?" asked Caspian.</p><p>"Oh, as for me," said the Red Dwarf, who had been listening with
complete indifference, "your Majesty knows I think the Horn—and that
bit of broken stone over there—and your great King Peter—and your
Lion Aslan—are all eggs in moonshine.  It's all one to me when your
Majesty blows the Horn.  All I insist is that the army is told nothing
about it.  There's no good raising hopes of magical help which (as I
think) are sure to be disappointed."</p><p>"Then in the name of Aslan we will wind Queen Susan's Horn," said
Caspian.</p><p>"There is one thing, Sire," said Doctor Cornelius, "that should perhaps
be done first.  We do not know what form the help will take.  It might
call Aslan himself from oversea.  But I think it is more likely to call
Peter the High King and his mighty consorts down from the high past.
But in either case, I do not think we can be sure that the help will
come to this very spot―"</p><p>"You never said a truer word," put in Trumpkin.</p><p>"I think," went on the learned man, "that they—or he—will come back
to one or other of the Ancient Places of Narnia.  This, where we now
sit, is the most ancient and most deeply magical of all, and here, I
think, the answer is likeliest to come.  But there are two others.  One
is Lantern Waste, up–river, west of Beaversdam, where the Royal
Children first appeared in Narnia, as the records tell.  The other is
down at the river–mouth, where their castle of Cair Paravel once stood.
And if Aslan himself comes, that would be the best place for meeting
him too, for every story says that he is the son of the great
Emperor–over–Sea, and over the sea he will pass.  I should like very
much to send messengers to both places, to Lantern Waste and the
river–mouth, to receive them—or him—or it."</p><p>"Just as I thought," muttered Trumpkin.  "The first result of all this
foolery is not to bring us help but to lose us two fighters."</p><p>"Who would you think of sending, Doctor Cornelius?" asked Caspian.</p><p>"Squirrels are best for getting through enemy country without being
caught," said Trufflehunter.</p><p>"All our squirrels (and we haven't many)," said Nikabrik, "are rather
flighty.  The only one I'd trust on a job like that would be
Pattertwig."</p><p>"Let it be Pattertwig, then," said King Caspian.  "And who for our
other messenger?  I know you'd go, Trufflehunter, but you haven't the
speed.  Nor you, Doctor Cornelius."</p><p>"I won't go," said Nikabrik.  "With all these Humans and beasts about,
there must be a Dwarf here to see that the Dwarfs are fairly treated."</p><p>"Thimbles and thunderstorms!" cried Trumpkin in a rage.  "Is that how
you speak to the King?  Send me, Sire, I'll go."</p><p>"But I thought you didn't believe in the Horn, Trumpkin," said Caspian.</p><p>"No more I do, your Majesty.  But what's that got to do with it?  I
might as well die on a wild goose chase as die here.  You are my King.
I know the difference between giving advice and taking orders.  You've
had my advice, and now it's the time for orders."</p><p>"I will never forget this, Trumpkin," said Caspian.  "Send for
Pattertwig, one of you.  And when shall I blow the Horn?"</p><p>"I would wait for sunrise, your Majesty," said Doctor Cornelius.  "That
sometimes has an effect in operations of White Magic."</p><p>A few minutes later Pattertwig arrived and had his task explained to
him.  As he was, like many squirrels, full of courage and dash and
energy and excitement and mischief (not to say conceit), he no sooner
heard it than he was eager to be off.  It was arranged that he should
run for Lantern Waste while Trumpkin made the shorter journey to the
river–mouth.  After a hasty meal they both set off with the fervent
thanks and good wishes of the King, the Badger, and Cornelius.</p></section><footer/></body></html>