<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch10.xhtml" title="Chapter X"/><link rel="next" href="ch12.xhtml" title="Chapter XII"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter XI" epub:type="chapter" id="id70360710974700"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter XI</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Lion Roars</em></h3></div></div></div><p>When the whole party was finally awake Lucy had to tell her story for
the fourth time.  The blank silence which followed it was as
discouraging as anything could be.</p><p>"I can't see anything," said Peter after he had stared his eyes sore.
"Can you, Susan?"</p><p>"No, of course I can't," snapped Susan.  "Because there isn't anything
to see.  She's been dreaming.  Do lie down and go to sleep, Lucy."</p><p>"And I do hope," said Lucy in a tremulous voice, "that you will all
come with me.  Because—because I'll have to go with him whether anyone
else does or not."</p><p>"Don't talk nonsense, Lucy," said Susan.  "Of course you can't go off
on your own.  Don't let her, Peter.  She's being downright naughty."</p><p>"I'll go with her, if she <span class="emphasis"><em>must</em></span> go," said Edmund.  "She's been right
before."</p><p>"I know she has," said Peter.  "And she may have been right this
morning.  We certainly had no luck going down the gorge.  Still—at
this hour of the night.  And why should Aslan be invisible to us?  He
never used to be.  It's not like him.  What does the D.L.F. say?"</p><p>"Oh, I say nothing at all," answered the Dwarf.  "If you all go, of
course, I'll go with you; and if your party splits up, I'll go with the
High King.  That's my duty to him and King Caspian.  But, if you ask my
private opinion, I'm a plain dwarf who doesn't think there's much
chance of finding a road by night where you couldn't find one by day.
And I have no use for magic lions which are talking lions and don't
talk, and friendly lions though they don't do us any good, and whopping
big lions though nobody can see them.  It's all bilge and beanstalks as
far as I can see."</p><p>"He's beating his paw on the ground for us to hurry," said Lucy.  "We
must go <span class="emphasis"><em>now</em></span>.  At least I must."</p><p>"You've no right to try to force the rest of us like that.  It's four
to one and you're the youngest," said Susan.</p><p>"Oh, come on," growled Edmund.  "We've got to go.  There'll be no peace
till we do."  He fully intended to back Lucy up, but he was annoyed at
losing his night's sleep and was making up for it by doing everything
as sulkily as possible.</p><p>"On the march, then," said Peter, wearily fitting his arm into his
shield–strap and putting his helmet on.  At any other time he would
have said something nice to Lucy, who was his favourite sister, for he
knew how wretched she must be feeling, and he knew that, whatever had
happened, it was not her fault.  But he couldn't help being a little
annoyed with her all the same.</p><p>Susan was the worst.  "Supposing <span class="emphasis"><em>I</em></span> started behaving like Lucy," she
said.  "I might threaten to stay here whether the rest of you went on
or not.  I jolly well think I shall."</p><p>"Obey the High King, your Majesty," said Trumpkin, "and let's be off.
If I'm not to be allowed to sleep, I'd as soon march as stand here
talking."</p><p>And so at last they got on the move.  Lucy went first, biting her lip
and trying not to say all the things she thought of saying to Susan.
But she forgot them when she fixed her eyes on Aslan.  He turned and
walked at a slow pace about thirty yards ahead of them.  The others had
only Lucy's directions to guide them, for Aslan was not only invisible
to them but silent as well.  His big cat–like paws made no noise on the
grass.</p><p>He led them to the right of the dancing trees—whether they were still
dancing nobody knew, for Lucy had her eyes on the Lion and the rest had
their eyes on Lucy—and nearer the edge of the gorge.  "Cobbles and
kettle–drums!" thought Trumpkin.  "I hope this madness isn't going to
end in a moonlight climb and broken necks."</p><p>For a long way Aslan went along the top of the precipices.  Then they
came to a place where some little trees grew right on the edge.  He
turned and disappeared among them.  Lucy held her breath, for it looked
as if he had plunged over the cliff; but she was too busy keeping him
in sight to stop and think about this.  She quickened her pace and was
soon among the trees herself.  Looking down, she could see a steep and
narrow path going slant–wise down into the gorge between rocks, and
Aslan descending it.  He turned and looked at her with his happy eyes.
Lucy clapped her hands and began to scramble down after him.  From
behind her she heard the voices of the others shouting, "Hi!  Lucy!
Look out, for goodness' sake.  You're right on the edge of the gorge.
Come back―" and then, a moment later, Edmund's voice saying, "No,
she's right.  There is a way down."</p><p>Half–way down the path Edmund caught up with her.</p><p>"Look!" he said in great excitement.  "Look!  What's that shadow
crawling down in front of us?"</p><p>"It's <span class="emphasis"><em>his</em></span> shadow," said Lucy.</p><p>"I do believe you're right, Lu," said Edmund.  "I can't think how I
didn't see it before.  But where is he?"</p><p>"With his shadow, of course.  Can't you see him?"</p><p>"Well, I almost thought I did—for a moment.  It's such a rum light."</p><p>"Get on, King Edmund, get on," came Trumpkin's voice from behind and
above: and then, farther behind and still nearly at the top, Peter's
voice saying, "Oh, buck up, Susan.  Give me your hand.  Why, a baby
could get down here.  And do stop grousing."</p><p>In a few minutes they were at the bottom and the roaring of water
filled their ears.  Treading delicately, like a cat, Aslan stepped from
stone to stone across the stream.  In the middle he stopped, bent down
to drink, and as he raised his shaggy head, dripping from the water, he
turned to face them again.  This time Edmund saw him.  "Oh, Aslan!" he
cried, darting forward.  But the Lion whisked round and began padding
up the slope on the far side of the Rush.</p><p>"Peter, Peter," cried Edmund.  "Did you see?"</p><p>"I saw something," said Peter.  "But it's so tricky in this moonlight.
On we go, though, and three cheers for Lucy.  I don't feel half so
tired now, either."</p><p>Aslan without hesitation led them to their left, farther up the gorge.
The whole journey was odd and dream–like—the roaring stream, the wet
grey grass, the glimmering cliffs which they were approaching, and
always the glorious, silently pacing Beast ahead.  Everyone except
Susan and the Dwarf could see him now.</p><p>Presently they came to another steep path, up the face of the further
precipices.  These were far higher than the ones they had just
descended, and the journey up them was a long and tedious zig–zag.
Fortunately the Moon shone right above the gorge so that neither side
was in shadow.</p><p>Lucy was nearly blown when the tail and hind legs of Aslan disappeared
over the top: but with one last effort she scrambled after him and came
out, rather shaky–legged and breathless, on the hill they had been
trying to reach ever since they left Glasswater.  The long gentle slope
(heather and grass and a few very big rocks that shone white in the
moonlight) stretched up to where it vanished in a glimmer of trees
about half a mile away.  She knew it.  It was the hill of the Stone
Table.</p><p>With a jingling of mail the others climbed up behind her.  Aslan glided
on before them and they walked after him.</p><p>"Lucy," said Susan in a very small voice.</p><p>"Yes?" said Lucy.</p><p>"I see him now.  I'm sorry."</p><p>"That's all right."</p><p>"But I've been far worse than you know.  I really believed it was
him—he, I mean—yesterday.  When he warned us not to go down to the
fir wood.  And I really believed it was him to–night, when you woke us
up.  I mean, deep down inside.  Or I could have, if I'd let myself.
But I just wanted to get out of the woods and—and—oh, I don't know.
And what ever am I to say to him?"</p><p>"Perhaps you won't need to say much," suggested Lucy.</p><p>Soon they reached the trees and through them the children could see the
Great Mound, Aslan's How, which had been raised over the Table since
their days.</p><p>"Our side don't keep very good watch," muttered Trumpkin.  "We ought to
have been challenged before now―"</p><p>"Hush!" said the other four, for now Aslan had stopped and turned and
stood facing them, looking so majestic that they felt as glad as anyone
can who feels afraid, and as afraid as anyone can who feels glad.  The
boys strode forward: Lucy made way for them: Susan and the Dwarf shrank
back.</p><p>"Oh, Aslan," said King Peter, dropping on one knee and raising the
Lion's heavy paw to his face, "I'm so glad.  And I'm so sorry.  I've
been leading them wrong ever since we started and especially yesterday
morning."</p><p>"My dear son," said Aslan.</p><p>Then he turned and welcomed Edmund.  "Well done," were his words.</p><p>Then, after an awful pause, the deep voice said, "Susan."  Susan made
no answer but the others thought she was crying.  "You have listened to
fears, child," said Aslan.  "Come, let me breathe on you.  Forget them.
Are you brave again?"</p><p>"A little, Aslan," said Susan.</p><p>"And now!" said Aslan in a much louder voice with just a hint of a roar
in it, while his tail lashed his flanks.  "And now, where is this
little Dwarf, this famous swordsman and archer, who doesn't believe in
lions?  Come here, son of Earth, come HERE!"—and the last word was no
longer the hint of a roar but almost the real thing.</p><p>"Wraiths and wreckage!" gasped Trumpkin in the ghost of a voice.  The
children, who knew Aslan well enough to see that he liked the Dwarf
very much, were not disturbed; but it was quite another thing for
Trumpkin, who had never seen a lion before, let alone this Lion.  He
did the only sensible thing he could have done; that is, instead of
bolting, he tottered towards Aslan.</p><p>Aslan pounced.  Have you ever seen a very young kitten being carried in
the mother cat's mouth?  It was like that.  The Dwarf, hunched up in a
little, miserable ball, hung from Aslan's mouth.  The Lion gave him one
shake and all his armour rattled like a tinker's pack and
then—hey–presto—the Dwarf flew up in the air.  He was as safe as if
he had been in bed, though he did not feel so.  As he came down the
huge velvety paws caught him as gently as a mother's arms and set him
(right way up, too) on the ground.</p><p>"Son of Earth, shall we be friends?" asked Aslan.</p><p>"Ye—he—he—hes," panted the Dwarf, for it had not yet got its breath
back.</p><p>"Now," said Aslan.  "The Moon is setting.  Look behind you: there is
the dawn beginning.  We have no time to lose.  You three, you sons of
Adam and son of Earth, hasten into the Mound and deal with what you
will find there."</p><p>The Dwarf was still speechless and neither of the boys dared to ask if
Aslan would follow them.  All three drew their swords and saluted, then
turned and jingled away into the dusk.  Lucy noticed that there was no
sign of weariness in their faces: both the High King and King Edmund
looked more like men than boys.</p><p>The girls watched them out of sight, standing close beside Aslan.  The
light was changing.  Low down in the east, Aravir, the morning star of
Narnia, gleamed like a little moon.  Aslan, who seemed larger than
before, lifted his head, shook his mane and roared.</p><p>The sound, deep and throbbing at first like an organ beginning on a low
note, rose and became louder, and then far louder again, till the earth
and air were shaking with it.  It rose up from that hill and floated
across all Narnia.  Down in Miraz's camp men woke, stared palely in one
another's faces, and grasped their weapons.  Down below that in the
Great River, now at its coldest hour, the heads and shoulders of the
nymphs, and the great weedy–bearded head of the river–god, rose from
the water.  Beyond it, in every field and wood, the alert ears of
rabbits rose from their holes, the sleepy heads of birds came out from
under wings, owls hooted, vixens barked, hedgehogs grunted, the trees
stirred.  In towns and villages mothers pressed babies close to their
breasts, staring with wild eyes, dogs whimpered, and men leaped up
groping for lights.  Far away on the northern frontier the mountain
giants peered from the dark gateways of their castles.</p><p>What Lucy and Susan saw was a dark something coming to them from almost
every direction across the hills.  It looked first like a black mist
creeping on the ground, then like the stormy waves of a black sea
rising higher and higher as it came on, and then, at last, like what it
was—woods on the move.  All the trees of the world appeared to be
rushing towards Aslan.  But as they drew nearer they looked less like
trees, and when the whole crowd, bowing and curtsying and waving thin
long arms to Aslan, were all around Lucy, she saw that it was a crowd
of human shapes.  Pale birch–girls were tossing their heads,
willow–women pushed back their hair from their brooding faces to gaze
on Aslan, the queenly beeches stood still and adored him, shaggy
oak–men, lean and melancholy elms, shock–headed hollies (dark
themselves, but their wives all bright with berries) and gay rowans,
all bowed and rose again, shouting, "Aslan, Aslan!" in their various
husky or creaking or wave–like voices.</p><p>The crowd and the dance round Aslan (for it had become a dance once
more) grew so thick and rapid that Lucy was confused.  She never saw
where certain other people came from who were soon capering about among
the trees.  One was a youth, dressed only in a fawn–skin, with
vine–leaves wreathed in his curly hair.  His face would have been
almost too pretty for a boy's, if it had not looked so extremely wild.
You felt, as Edmund said when he saw him a few days later, "There's a
chap who might do anything—absolutely anything."  He seemed to have a
great many names—Bromios, Bassareus, and the Ram were three of them.
There were a lot of girls with him, as wild as he.  There was even,
unexpectedly, someone on a donkey.  And everybody was laughing: and
every body was shouting out, "Euan, euan, eu–oi–oi–oi."</p><p>"Is it a Romp, Aslan?" cried the youth.  And apparently it was.  But
nearly everyone seemed to have a different idea as to what they were
playing.  It may have been Tig, but Lucy never discovered who was It.
It was rather like Blind Man's Buff, only everyone behaved as if they
were blindfolded.  It was not unlike Hunt the Slipper, but the slipper
was never found.  What made it more complicated was that the man on the
donkey, who was old and enormously fat, began calling out at once,
"Refreshments!  Time for refreshments," and falling off his donkey and
being bundled on to it again by the others, while the donkey was under
the impression that the whole thing was a circus, and tried to give a
display of walking on its hind legs.  And all the time there were more
and more vine leaves everywhere.  And soon not only leaves but vines.
They were climbing up everything.  They were running up the legs of the
tree people and circling round their necks.  Lucy put up her hands to
push back her hair and found she was pushing back vine branches.  The
donkey was a mass of them.  His tail was completely entangled and
something dark was nodding between his ears.  Lucy looked again and saw
it was a bunch of grapes.  After that it was mostly grapes—overhead
and underfoot and all around.</p><p>"Refreshments!  Refreshments," roared the old man.  Everyone began
eating, and whatever hothouses your people may have, you have never
tasted such grapes.  Really good grapes, firm and tight on the outside,
but bursting into cool sweetness when you put them into your mouth,
were one of the things the girls had never had quite enough of before.
Here, there were more than anyone could possibly want, and no
table–manners at all.  One saw sticky and stained fingers everywhere,
and, though mouths were full, the laughter never ceased nor the
yodelling cries of <span class="emphasis"><em>Euan, euan, eu–oi–oi–oi–oi</em></span>, till all of a sudden
everyone felt at the same moment that the game (whatever it was), and
the feast, ought to be over, and everyone flopped down breathless on
the ground and turned their faces to Aslan to hear what he would say
next.</p><p>At that moment the sun was just rising and Lucy remembered something
and whispered to Susan,</p><p>"I say, Su, I know who they are."</p><p>"Who?"</p><p>"The boy with the wild face is Bacchus and the old one on the donkey is
Silenus.  Don't you remember Mr Tumnus telling us about them long ago?"</p><p>"Yes, of course.  But I say, Lu―"</p><p>"What?"</p><p>"I wouldn't have felt very safe with Bacchus and all his wild girls if
we'd met them without Aslan."</p><p>"I should think not," said Lucy.</p></section><footer/></body></html>