<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XII</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch11.xhtml" title="Chapter XI"/><link rel="next" href="ch13.xhtml" title="Chapter XIII"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter XII" epub:type="chapter" id="id70360711020060"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter XII</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Sorcery and Sudden Vengeance</em></h3></div></div></div><p>Meanwhile Trumpkin and the two boys arrived at the dark little stone
archway which led into the inside of the Mound, and two sentinel
badgers (the white patches on their cheeks were all Edmund could see of
them) leaped up with bared teeth and asked them in snarling voices,
"Who goes there?"</p><p>"Trumpkin," said the Dwarf.  "Bringing the High King of Narnia out of
the far past."</p><p>The badgers nosed at the boys' hands.  "At last," they said.  "At last."</p><p>"Give us a light, friends," said Trumpkin.</p><p>The badgers found a torch just inside the arch and Peter lit it and
handed it to Trumpkin.  "The D.L.F. had better lead," he said.  "We
don't know our way about this place."</p><p>Trumpkin took the torch and went ahead into the dark tunnel.  It was a
cold, black, musty place, with an occasional bat fluttering in the
torchlight, and plenty of cobwebs.  The boys, who had been mostly in
the open air since that morning at the railway station, felt as if they
were going into a trap or a prison.</p><p>"I say, Peter," whispered Edmund.  "Look at those carvings on the
walls.  Don't they look old?  And yet we're older than that.  When we
were last here, they hadn't been made."</p><p>"Yes," said Peter.  "That makes one think."</p><p>The Dwarf went on ahead and then turned to the right, and then to the
left, and then down some steps, and then to the left again.  Then at
last they saw a light ahead—light from under a door.  And now for the
first time they heard voices, for they had come to the door of the
central chamber.  The voices inside were angry ones.  Someone was
talking so loudly that the approach of the boys and the Dwarf had not
been heard.</p><p>"Don't like the sound of that," whispered Trumpkin to Peter.  "Let's
listen for a moment."  All three stood perfectly still on the outside
of the door.</p><p>"You know well enough," said a voice ("That's the King," whispered
Trumpkin), "why the Horn was not blown at sunrise that morning.  Have
you forgotten that Miraz fell upon us almost before Trumpkin had gone,
and we were fighting for our lives for the space of three hours and
more?  I blew it when first I had a breathing space."</p><p>"I'm not likely to forget it," came the angry voice, "when my Dwarfs
bore the brunt of the attack and one in five of them fell."  ("That's
Nikabrik," whispered Trumpkin.)</p><p>"For shame, Dwarf," came a thick voice ("Trufflehunter's," said
Trumpkin).  "We all did as much as the Dwarfs and none more than the
King."</p><p>"Tell that tale your own way for all I care," answered Nikabrik.  "But
whether it was that the Horn was blown too late, or whether there was
no magic in it, no help has come.  You, you great clerk, you master
magician, you know–all; are you still asking us to hang our hopes on
Aslan and King Peter and all the rest of it?"</p><p>"I must confess—I cannot deny it—that I am deeply disappointed in the
result of the operation," came the answer.  ("That'll be Doctor
Cornelius," said Trumpkin.)</p><p>"To speak plainly," said Nikabrik, "your wallet's empty, your eggs
addled, your fish uncaught, your promises broken.  Stand aside then and
let others work.  And that is why―"</p><p>"The help will come," said Trufflehunter.  "I stand by Aslan.  Have
patience, like us beasts.  The help will come.  It may be even now at
the door."</p><p>"Pah!" snarled Nikabrik.  "You badgers would have us wait till the sky
falls and we can all catch larks.  I tell you we can't wait.  Food is
running short; we lose more than we can afford at every encounter; our
followers are slipping away."</p><p>"And why?" asked Trufflehunter.  "I'll tell you why.  Because it is
noised among them that we have called on the Kings of old and the Kings
of old have not answered.  The last words Trumpkin spoke before he went
(and went, most likely, to his death) were, 'If you must blow the Horn,
do not let the army know why you blow it or what you hope from it.'
But that same evening everyone seemed to know."</p><p>"You'd better have shoved your grey snout in a hornets' nest, Badger,
than suggest that I am the blab," said Nikabrik.  "Take it back, or―"</p><p>"Oh, stop it, both of you," said King Caspian.  "I want to know what it
is that Nikabrik keeps on hinting we should do.  But before that, I
want to know who those two strangers are whom he has brought into our
council and who stand there with their ears open and their mouths shut."</p><p>"They are friends of mine," said Nikabrik.  "And what better right have
you yourself to be here than that you are a friend of Trumpkin's and
the Badger's?  And what right has that old dotard in the black gown to
be here except that he is your friend?  Why am I to be the only one who
can't bring in his friends?"</p><p>"His Majesty is the King to whom you have sworn allegiance," said
Trufflehunter sternly.</p><p>"Court manners, court manners," sneered Nikabrik.  "But in this hole we
may talk plainly.  You know—and he knows—that this Telmarine boy will
be king of nowhere and nobody in a week unless we can help him out of
the trap in which he sits."</p><p>"Perhaps," said Cornelius, "your new friends would like to speak for
themselves?  You there, who and what are you?"</p><p>"Worshipful Master Doctor," came a thin, whining voice.  "So please
you, I'm only a poor old woman, I am, and very obliged to his
Worshipful Dwarfship for his friendship, I'm sure.  His Majesty, bless
his handsome face, has no need to be afraid of an old woman that's
nearly doubled up with the rheumatics and hasn't two sticks to put
under her kettle.  I have some poor little skill—not like yours,
Master Doctor, of course—in small spells and cantrips that I'd be glad
to use against our enemies if it was agreeable to all concerned.  For I
hate 'em.  Oh yes.  No one hates better than me."</p><p>"That is all most interesting and—er—satisfactory," said Doctor
Cornelius.  "I think I now know what you are, Madam.  Perhaps your
other friend, Nikabrik, would give some account of himself?"</p><p>A dull, grey voice at which Peter's flesh crept replied, "I'm hunger.
I'm thirst.  Where I bite, I hold till I die, and even after death they
must cut out my mouthful from my enemy's body and bury it with me.  I
can fast a hundred years and not die.  I can lie a hundred nights on
the ice and not freeze.  I can drink a river of blood and not burst.
Show me your enemies."</p><p>"And it is in the presence of these two that you wish to disclose your
plan?" said Caspian.</p><p>"Yes," said Nikabrik.  "And by their help that I mean to execute it."</p><p>There was a minute or two during which Trumpkin and the boys could hear
Caspian and his two friends speaking in low voices but could not make
out what they were saying.  Then Caspian spoke aloud.</p><p>"Well, Nikabrik," he said, "we will hear your plan."</p><p>There was a pause so long that the boys began to wonder if Nikabrik was
ever going to begin; when he did, it was in a lower voice, as if he
himself did not much like what he was saying.</p><p>"All said and done," he muttered, "none of us knows the truth about the
ancient days in Narnia.  Trumpkin believed none of the stories.  I was
ready to put them to the trial.  We tried first the Horn and it has
failed.  If there ever was a High King Peter and a Queen Susan and a
King Edmund and a Queen Lucy, then either they have not heard us, or
they cannot come, or they are our enemies―"</p><p>"Or they are on the way," put in Trufflehunter.</p><p>"You can go on saying that till Miraz has fed us all to his dogs.  As I
was saying, we have tried one link in the chain of old legends, and it
has done us no good.  Well.  But when your sword breaks, you draw your
dagger.  The stories tell of other powers beside the ancient Kings and
Queens.  How if we could call <span class="emphasis"><em>them</em></span> up?"</p><p>"If you mean Aslan," said Trufflehunter, "it's all one calling on him
and on the Kings.  They were his servants.  If he will not send them
(but I make no doubt he will), is he more likely to come himself?"</p><p>"No.  You're right there," said Nikabrik.  "Aslan and the Kings go
together.  Either Aslan is dead, or he is not on our side.  Or else
something stronger than himself keeps him back.  And if he did
come—how do we know he'd be our friend?  He was not always a good
friend to Dwarfs by all that's told.  Not even to all beasts.  Ask the
Wolves.  And anyway, he was in Narnia only once that I ever heard of,
and he didn't stay long.  You may drop Aslan out of the reckoning.  I
was thinking of someone else."</p><p>There was no answer, and for a few minutes it was so still that Edmund
could hear the wheezy and snuffling breath of the Badger.</p><p>"Who do you mean?" said Caspian at last.</p><p>"I mean a power so much greater than Aslan's that it held Narnia
spellbound for years and years, if the stories are true."</p><p>"The White Witch!" cried three voices all at once, and from the noise
Peter guessed that three people had leaped to their feet.</p><p>"Yes," said Nikabrik very slowly and distinctly, "I mean the Witch.
Sit down again.  Don't all take fright at a name as if you were
children.  We want power: and we want a power that will be on our side.
As for power, do not the stories say that the Witch defeated Aslan, and
bound him, and killed him on that very stone which is over there, just
beyond the light?"</p><p>"But they also say that he came to life again," said the Badger sharply.</p><p>"Yes, they <span class="emphasis"><em>say</em></span>," answered Nikabrik, "but you'll notice that we hear
precious little about anything he did afterwards.  He just fades out of
the story.  How do you explain that, if he really came to life?  Isn't
it much more likely that he didn't, and that the stories say nothing
more about him because there was nothing more to say?"</p><p>"He established the Kings and Queens," said Caspian.</p><p>"A King who has just won a great battle can usually establish himself
without the help of a performing lion," said Nikabrik.  There was a
fierce growl, probably from Trufflehunter.</p><p>"And anyway," Nikabrik continued, "what came of the Kings and their
reign?  They faded too.  But it's very different with the Witch.  They
say she ruled for a hundred years: a hundred years of winter.  There's
power, if you like.  There's something practical."</p><p>"But, heaven and earth!" said the King, "haven't we always been told
that she was the worst enemy of all?  Wasn't she a tyrant ten times
worse than Miraz?"</p><p>"Perhaps," said Nikabrik in a cold voice.  "Perhaps she was for you
humans, if there were any of you in those days.  Perhaps she was for
some of the beasts.  She stamped out the Beavers, I dare say; at least
there are none of them in Narnia now.  But she got on all right with us
Dwarfs.  I'm a Dwarf and I stand by my own people.  <span class="emphasis"><em>We're</em></span> not afraid
of the Witch."</p><p>"But you've joined with us," said Trufflehunter.</p><p>"Yes, and a lot of good it has done my people, so far," snapped
Nikabrik.  "Who is sent on all the dangerous raids?  The Dwarfs.  Who
goes short when the rations fail?  The Dwarfs.  Who―"</p><p>"Lies!  All lies!" said the Badger.</p><p>"And so," said Nikabrik, whose voice now rose to a scream, "if you
can't help my people, I'll go to someone who can."</p><p>"Is this open treason, Dwarf?" asked the King.</p><p>"Put that sword back in its sheath, Caspian," said Nikabrik.  "Murder
at council, eh?  Is that your game?  Don't be fool enough to try it.
Do you think I'm afraid of you?  There's three on my side, and three on
yours."</p><p>"Come on, then," snarled Trufflehunter, but he was immediately
interrupted.</p><p>"Stop, stop, stop," said Doctor Cornelius.  "You go on too fast.  The
Witch is dead.  All the stories agree on that.  What does Nikabrik mean
by calling on the Witch?"</p><p>That grey and terrible voice which had spoken only once before said,
"Oh, <span class="emphasis"><em>is</em></span> she?"</p><p>And then the shrill, whining voice began, "Oh, bless his heart, his
dear little Majesty needn't mind about the White Lady—that's what <span class="emphasis"><em>we</em></span>
call her—being dead.  The Worshipful Master Doctor is only making game
of a poor old woman like me when he says that.  Sweet Master Doctor,
learned Master Doctor, who ever heard of a witch that really died?  You
can always get them back."</p><p>"Call her up," said the grey voice.  "We are all ready.  Draw the
circle.  Prepare the blue fire."</p><p>Above the steadily increasing growl of the Badger and Cornelius's sharp
"What?" rose the voice of King Caspian like thunder.</p><p>"So that is your plan, Nikabrik!  Black sorcery and the calling up of
an accursed ghost.  And I see who your companions are—a Hag and a
Wer–Wolf!"</p><p>The next minute or so was very confused.  There was an animal roaring,
a clash of steel; the boys and Trumpkin rushed in; Peter had a glimpse
of a horrible, grey, gaunt creature, half man and half wolf, in the
very act of leaping upon a boy about his own age, and Edmund saw a
badger and a Dwarf rolling on the floor in a sort of cat fight.
Trumpkin found himself face to face with the Hag.  Her nose and chin
stuck out like a pair of nut–crackers, her dirty grey hair was flying
about her face and she had just got Doctor Cornelius by the throat.  At
one slash of Trumpkin's sword her head rolled on the floor.  Then the
light was knocked over and it was all swords, teeth, claws, fists and
boots for about sixty seconds.  Then silence.</p><p>"Are you all right, Ed?"</p><p>"I—I think so," panted Edmund.  "I've got that brute Nikabrik, but
he's still alive."</p><p>"Weights and water–bottles!" came an angry voice.  "It's <span class="emphasis"><em>me</em></span> you're
sitting on.  Get off.  You're like a young elephant."</p><p>"Sorry, D.L.F.," said Edmund.  "Is that better?"</p><p>"Ow!  No!" bellowed Trumpkin.  "You're putting your boot in my mouth.
Go away."</p><p>"Is King Caspian anywhere?" asked Peter.</p><p>"I'm here," said a rather faint voice.  "Something bit me."</p><p>They all heard the noise of someone striking a match.  It was Edmund.
The little flame showed his face, looking pale and dirty.  He blundered
about for a little, found the candle (they were no longer using the
lamp, for they had run out of oil), set it on the table and lit it.
When the flame rose clear, several people scrambled to their feet.  Six
faces blinked at one another in the candlelight.</p><p>"We don't seem to have any enemies left," said Peter.  "There's the
Hag, dead."  (He turned his eyes quickly away from her.)  "And
Nikabrik, dead too.  And I suppose this thing is a Wer–Wolf.  It's so
long since I've seen one.  Wolf's head and man's body.  That means he
was just turning from man into wolf at the moment he was killed.  And
you, I suppose, are King Caspian?"</p><p>"Yes," said the other boy.  "But I've no idea who you are."</p><p>"It's the High King, King Peter," said Trumpkin.</p><p>"Your Majesty is very welcome," said Caspian.</p><p>"And so is <span class="emphasis"><em>your</em></span> Majesty," said Peter.  "I haven't come to take your
place, you know, but to put you into it."</p><p>"Your Majesty," said another voice at Peter's elbow.  He turned and
found himself face to face with the Badger.  Peter leaned forward, put
his arms round the beast and kissed the furry head: it wasn't a girlish
thing for him to do, because he was the High King.</p><p>"Best of badgers," he said.  "You never doubted us all through."</p><p>"No credit to me, your Majesty," said Trufflehunter.  "I'm a beast and
we don't change.  I'm a badger, what's more, and we hold on."</p><p>"I am sorry for Nikabrik," said Caspian, "though he hated me from the
first moment he saw me.  He had gone sour inside from long suffering
and hating.  If we had won quickly he might have become a good Dwarf in
the days of peace.  I don't know which of us killed him.  I'm glad of
that."</p><p>"You're bleeding," said Peter.</p><p>"Yes, I'm bitten," said Caspian.  "It was that—that wolf thing."
Cleaning and bandaging the wound took a little time, and when it was
done Trumpkin said, "Now.  Before everything else we want some
breakfast."</p><p>"But not here," said Peter.</p><p>"No," said Caspian with a shudder.  "And we must send someone to take
away the bodies."</p><p>"Let the vermin be flung into a pit," said Peter.  "But the Dwarf we
will give to his people to be buried in their own fashion."</p><p>They breakfasted at last in another of the dark cellars of Aslan's How.
It was not such a breakfast as they would have chosen, for Caspian and
Cornelius were thinking of venison pasties, and Peter and Edmund of
buttered eggs and hot coffee, but what everyone got was a little bit of
cold bear–meat (out of the boys' pockets), a lump of hard cheese, an
onion, and a mug of water.  But, from the way they fell to, anyone
would have supposed it was delicious.</p></section><footer/></body></html>